---
layout: post
title: "You, Me, and picoCTF's Most Renowned Challenge: The Legend of Solfire."
description: "A documentation of the four year and three day long journey to win the largest high school CTF competition, picoCTF, all in the form of a CTF writeup."
tags: [ctf]
---

# Introduction

This won't be the typical CTF writeup. [picoCTF](https://picoctf.org/), Carnegie Mellon University's high school cybersecurity competition, was my introduction to the world of CTFs and holds a bit of a special place in my heart. Since I registered in 2018, I had always set my sights on winning first place one day. This writeup will be a little more personal and (of course) a little more cringe, so if that's something you're not fond of you might want to skip this one.

Every year, I'd inch closer to placing. From off the scoreboard to 20th to 4th to finally 1st, I'd spend countless hours with my four teammates to solve increasingly difficult challenges with slim hopes we'd ever win. Working and growing with my teammates at [redpwn](https://redpwn.net/) and a variety of different friends had allowed us to break ground and get better every year, learning so many cool things about computers and hacking along the way.

There was, however, one last obstacle looming at the end of my journey. `solfire`, picoCTF's hardest challenge ever deployed to the platform, towered over me for a total of three long and stressful days, filled with aimless flailing and consecutive all-nighters. The only challenge written by the renowned CTF player [Robert Chen](https://robertchen.cc/), my role model and fellow founding member at [OtterSec](https://osec.io/), `solfire` had an _absurdly low_ solve count of only four, making it the hardest challenge ever featured in picoCTF.

`solfire` was the choke point to first. Almost every other challenge, besides `liveart`, had been solved trivially by teams in the global top 10. b1c, the audience favorite for their win last year, only had to solve `solfire` to max and secure first place.
